In this video we'll cover a second
problem to whet your appetite for things
to come, namely the problem of sequence
alignment.
So this is a fundamental problem in
computational genomics.
If you take a class on the subject it's
very likely to occupy the very first
couple of lectures.
So in this problem you're given two
strings over an alphabet and no prizes
for guessing which is the alphabet we're
most likely to care about.
Typically, these strings represent
portions of one or more genomes.
And just as a toy running example you can
just imagine that the two strings were
given are A, G, G, G, C, T and A,
G, G, C, A.
Know that the two input strings do not
necessarily need to be of the same
length.
And informally speaking, the goal of this
sequence alignment problem is to figure
out how similar the two input strings
are.
Obviously, I haven't told you what I mean
by two strings being similar.
That's something we'll develop over the
next couple of slides.
Why might you want to solve this problem?
Well, there's actually a lot of reasons.
Let me just give you two of many
examples.
What will be the conjecture or the
function of regions of a genome that you
don't understand,
lets say the human genome,
from similar regions that exist in
genomes that you do understand or at
least understand better,
say the mouse genome.
If you see a string that has a known
function in the well understood genome
and you see something similar in the
poorly understood genome, you might
conjecture it has the same or similar
function.
A totally different reason you might want
to compare the genomes of two different
species, is to figure out whether one
evolved directly from the other and when.
A second totally different reason you
might want to compare the genomes of two
different species is to understand their
evolutionary relationship.
So for example, maybe you have three
species A, B, and C, and you're wondering
whether B evolved from A and then C
evolved from B, or whether B and C
evolved independently from a common
ancestor, A. And you might then take
genome similarity as a measure of
proximity in the evolutionary tree.
So having motivated the informal version
of the problem, let's work toward making
it more formal.
In particular, I owe you a discussion of
what I mean by two strings being similar.
So to develop intuition for this, let's
revisit the two strings that we
introduced on the previous slide A, G, G,
G, C, T, and A,
G, G, C, A.
Now,
if we just sort of eyeball these two
strings, I mean clearly they're not the
same string.
But, we somehow feel like they're more
similar than they are different.
So, where does that intuition come from?
Well, one way to make it more precise is
to notice that these two strings can be
nicely aligned in the following sense.
Lets write down the longer string, A,
G, G, G, C, T.
And, I'm going to write the shorter
string under it, and I'll insert a gap, a
space to make the two strings have the
same length.
I'm going to put the space where there
seems to be quote unquote a missing G.
And then, what sense is this a nice
alignment, well, it's clearly not
perfect.
We don't' get a character, by character
match of the two strings, but there's
only two minor flaws.
So on the one hand, we did have to insert
a gap and we do have to suffer one
mismatch in the final column.
So this institution motivates defining
similarity between two strings with
respect to their highest quality
alignment, their nicest alignment.
So we're getting closer to a formal
problem statement, but it's still
somewhat underdetermined.
Specifically, we need to make precise why
we might compare, why we might prefer one
alignment over another.
For example, is it better to have three
gaps and no mismatches or is it better to
have one gap and one mismatch?
So if in this video, we're effectively
going to punt on this question. We're
going to assume this problem's already
been solved experimentally, that it's
known and provided this part of the input
which is more costly, gaps and various
types of mismatches.
So here, then, is the formal problem
statement.
So, in addition to the two strings over
A,
C, G, T, we are provided as part of the
input, a non-negative number indicating
the cost we incurred in alignment for
each gap that we insert.
Similarly, for each possible mismatch of
two characters,
like, for example, mismatching an A and
T.
We're given as part of the input a
corresponding penalty.
Given this input, the responsibility of a
sequence alignment algorithm is to output
the alignment that minimizes the sum of
the penalties.
Another way to think of this output, the
minimum penalty allignment is, we're
trying to find in affect the minimum cost
explanation for how one of these strings
would've turned into the other.
So we can think of a gap as sort of
undoing a deletion that occurred some
time in the past and we can think of a
mismatch as representing a mutation.
So this minimum possible total penalty,
that is these values of this optimal
alignment is famous and fundamental
enough to have its own name namely the
Needleman-Wunsch score.
So this quantity is named after the two
authors that proposed efficient algorithm
for computing of the optimal alignment.
that appeared way back in 1970, in the
Journal of Molecular Biology.
And now, at last, we have a formal
definition of what it means for two
strings to be similar.
It means they have a small NW score, a
score close to 0.
So for example, if you have, if you have
a database with a whole bunch of genome
fragments,
according to this, you're going to define
the most similar fragments to be those
with the smallest NW score.
So, to bring the discussion back squarely
into the land of algorithms, let me point
out that this definition of genome sum,
similarity is intrinsically algorithmic.
This definition would be totally useless,
unless there existed in efficient
algorithm that given two strings and its
penalties computes the best alignment
between those two strings.
If you couldn't compute the score, you
would never use it as a measure of
similarity.
So this observation puts us under a lot
of pressure to devise an efficient
algorithm for finding the best alignment.
So how are we going to do that?
Well, we can always fall back to
brute-force search, where we iterate over
all of the conceivable alignments of the
two strings, compute the total penalty of
each of those alignments, and remember
the best one.
Clearly, correctness is not going to be
an issue for brute-force search.
It's correct essentially by definition.
The issue is how long does it take? So
let's ask a simpler question.
Let's just think about, how many
different alignments there are?
How many possibilities do we have to try?
So if [INAUDIBLE] let's imagine, I gave
you two strings of length 500, which is a
knot of a reasonable length.
Which of the following english phrases
best describes the number of
possibilities,
the number of alignments given to strings
with 500 characters each?
So I realize this is sort of a cheeky
question,
but I hope you can gather that what I was
looking for was part D.
So you know?
So, how big are each of these quantities,
anyways?
Well, in a, in a typical version of this
class, you might have about 50,000
students enrolled or so.
So that's somewhere between 10^44 and
10^5.5.
The number of people on earth is roughly
7,000.000.000.
So that's somewhere between 10^9 and
10^10/10.
The most common estimate I see for the
number of atoms in the known universe is
10^80.
And believe it or not, the number of
possible alignments of two strings of
length 500 is even bigger than that.
So I'll leave it for you to convince
yourself that the number of possibilities
is at least two raised to the 500.
the real number is actually noticeably
bigger than that. and because 10 is at
most 2^4, we can lower bound this number
by 10^125 quite a bit bigger than the
number of atoms in the universe.
And the point of course, is just that
it's utterly absurd to envision
implementing brute-force search even at a
scale of a few hundred characters.
And you know, forgetting about these sort
of astronomical, if you will, comparisons
even if you had string lengths much
smaller, say in the you know, a dozen or
two, you'd never ever run brute-force or
this is not going to work. And of course,
notice this is not the kind of problem
that's [INAUDIBLE] This just doesn't go
away if you wait a little while for
Moore's law to help you.
This is a fundamental limitation. It
says,
you are never going to compute alignments
of the strings that you care about,
unless you have a fast,
clever algorithm.
.
I'm happy to report that you will indeed
learn such a fast and clever algorithm
later on in this course.
Even better, it's just going to be a
straightforward instantiation of a much
more general algorithm design paradigm.
That of dynamic programming.